UPSC CSE Mains 2024 - General Studies Paper 1

Art and culture
Modern Indian History
World History
Geography
Indian society

Art and culture:-

1.Underline the changes in the field of society and economy from the Rig Vedic to the later Vedic period.(2024)
2.Estimate the contribution of Pallavas of Kanchi for the development of art and literature of South India.(2024)
11."Though the great Cholas are no more yet their name is still remembered with great pride because of their highest achievements in the domain of art and architecture". Comment.(2024)
Art and Culture Questions in UPSC Mains 2023
Explain the role of geographical factors towards the development of Ancient India. (10 Marks)
What are the main features of Vedic society and religion? Do you think some of the features are still prevailing in Indian society?(15 marks)
What were the major technological changes introduced during the Sultanate period? How did those technological changes influence the Indian society? (15 marks)

Art and Culture Questions in UPSC Mains 2022
How will you explain that medieval Indian temple sculptures represent the social life of those days?
Discuss the significance of the lion and bull figures in Indian mythology, art and architecture.
Art and Culture Questions in UPSC Mains 2021
Evaluate the nature of the Bhakti Movement and its contribution to Indian culture.
Art and Culture Questions in UPSC Mains 2020
The rock-cut architecture represents one of the most important sources of our knowledge of early Indian art and history. Discuss.
Pala period is the most significant phase in the history of Buddhism in India. Enumerate.
Indian Philosophy and tradition played a significant role in conceiving and shaping the monuments and their art in India. Discuss.
Persian literary sources of medieval India reflect the spirit of the age. Comment.
Art and Culture Questions in UPSC Mains 2019
Highlight the Central Asian and Greco-Bactrian elements in Gandhara art.
Art and Culture Questions in UPSC Mains 2018
Safeguarding the Indian Art Heritage is the need of the moment. Discuss.
Assess the importance of the accounts of the Chinese and Arab Travellers in the reconstruction of the history of India.
The Bhakti movement received a remarkable re-orientation with the advent of Sri Chaitanya Mahaprabhu. Discuss
Art and Culture Questions in UPSC Mains 2017
How do you justify the view that the level of excellence of the Gupta numismatic art is not at all noticeable in later times?
Examine how the decline of the traditional artisanal industry in colonial India crippled the rural economy.
Art and Culture Questions in UPSC Mains 2016
Early Buddhist Stupa-art, while depicting folk motifs and narratives successfully expounds Buddhist ideals. Elucidate.
Krishnadeva Raya, the King of Vijayanagar, was not only an accomplished scholar himself but was also a great patron of learning and literature. Discuss.
Art and Culture Questions in UPSC Mains 2015
The ancient civilization in the Indian sub-continent differed from those of Egypt, Mesopotamia, and Greece in that its culture and traditions have been preserved without a breakdown to the present day. Comment.
Mesolithic rock-cut architecture of India not only reflects the cultural life of the times but also a fine aesthetic sense comparable to modem painting. Critically evaluate this comment.
Art and Culture Questions in UPSC Mains 2014
To what extent has the urban planning and culture of the Indus Valley Civilization provided inputs to the present-day urbanization? Discuss.
Gandhara sculpture owed as much to the Romans as to the Greeks. Explain.
Taxila university was one of the oldest universities of the world with which were associated with a number of renowned learned personalities of different disciplines. Its strategic location caused its fame to flourish, but unlike Nalanda, it is not considered as a university in the modern sense. Discuss.
Sufis and medieval mystic saints failed to modify either the religious ideas and practices or the outward structure of Hindu / Muslim societies to any appreciable extent. Comment.
Art and Culture Questions in UPSC Mains 2013
Though not very useful from the point of view of a connected political history of South India, the Sangam literature portrays the social and economic conditions of its time with remarkable vividness. Comment.
Discuss the Tandava dance as recorded in the early Indian inscriptions.
Chola architecture represents a high watermark in the evolution of temple architecture. Discuss.

Modern Indian History:-
2024
1. What were the events that led to the Quit India Movement? Point out its results.

2. How far was the Industrial Revolution in England responsible for the decline of handicrafts and cottage industries in India?

2023
1. What was the difference between Mahatma Gandhi and Rabindranath Tagore in their approach towards education and nationalism?

2. How did the colonial rule affect the tribals in India and what was the tribal response to the colonial oppression?

2022
1. Why did the armies of the British East India Company – mostly comprising of Indian Soldiers – win consistently against the more numerous and better equipped armies of the then Indian rulers? Give reasons.

2. Why was there a sudden spurt in famines in colonial India since the mid-eighteenth century? Give reasons.

2021
1. To what extent did the role of the moderates prepare a base for the wider freedom movement? Comment.

2. Bring out the constructive programmes of Mahatma Gandhi during Non-Cooperation Movement and Civil Disobedience Movement.

2020
1. Evaluate the policies of Lord Curzon and their long term implications on the national movement.

2. Since the decade of the 1920s, the national movement acquired various ideological strands and thereby expanded its social base. Discuss.

2018

1. Throw light on the significance of thoughts of Mahatma Gandhi in the present times.

2. Why indentured labour was taken by British from India to other colonies? Have they been able to preserve their cultural identity over there?

2017

1. Clarify how mid-eighteenth century India was beset with the spectre of a fragmented polity?

2. Why did the ‘Moderates’ fail to carry conviction with the nation about their proclaimed ideology and political goals by the end of the nineteenth century?

3. Examine how the decline of traditional artisanal industry in colonial India crippled the rural economy.

4. Highlight the importance of new objective that got added to the vision of Indian independence since the twenties of the last century.

5. The women’s questions arose in modern India as a part of the 19th century social reform movement. What were the major issues and debates concerning women in that period?

2016

1. Explain how the upraising of 1857 constitutes an important watershed in the evolution of British policies towards colonial India.

2. Discuss the role of women in the freedom struggle especially during the Gandhian phase.

3. Highlight the difference in the approach of Subhash Chandra Bose and Mahatma Gandhi in the struggle for freedom.

2015

1. How different would have been the achievement of Indian independence without Mahatma Gandhi? Discuss.

2. Mahatma Gandhi and Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, despite having divergent approaches and strategies, had a common goal of amelioration of the downtrodden. Elucidate.

3. It would have been difficult for the Constituent Assembly to complete its historic task of drafting the Constitution for Independent India in just three years but for the experience gained with the Government of India Act, 1935. Discuss.

2014

1. The third battle of Panipat was fought in 1761. Why were so many empire-shaking battles fought at Panipat?

2. Examine critically the various facets of economic policies of the British in India from mid-eighteenth century till independence.

3. In what ways did the naval mutiny prove to be the last nail in the coffin of British colonial aspirations in India?

4. What were the major political, economic and social developments in the world which motivated the anti-colonial struggle in India?

2013

1. Defying the barriers of age, gender and religion, the Indian women became the torch-bearer during the struggle for freedom in India. Discuss.

2. Several foreigners made India their homeland and participated in various movements. Analyze their role in the Indian struggle for freedom.

3. “In many ways, Lord Dalhousie was the founder of modern India.” Elaborate.

4. Critically discuss the objectives of Bhoodan and Gramdan Movements initiated by Acharya Vinoba Bhave and their success.

Geography

2024
1. What is the phenomenon of ‘Cloudbursts’? Explain.

2. What is sea surface temperature rise? How does it affect the formation of tropical cyclones?

3. What is a twister? Why are the majority of twisters observed in areas around the Gulf of Mexico?

4. What is the concept of a ‘demographic winter’? Is the world moving towards such a situation? Elaborate.

5. The groundwater potential of the Gangetic valley is on a serious decline. How may it affect the food security of India?

2023
1. Discuss the consequence of Climate change on the food security in tropical countries.

2. Why is the world today confronted with a crisis of availability of and access to freshwater resources?

3. How are the fjords formed? Why do they constitute some of the most picturesque areas of the world?

4. Why is the South-West Monsoon called ‘Purvaiya’ (easterly) in Bhojpur Region? How has this directional seasonal wind system influenced the cultured ethos of the region?

5. Comment on the resource potentials of the long coastline of India and highlight the status of natural hazard preparedness in these areas. 

6. Identify and discuss the factors responsible for diversity of natural vegetation in India. Assess the significance of wildlife sanctuaries in rain forest regions of India. 

7. Why did human development fail to keep pace with economic development in India?

8. From being net food importer in 1960, India has emerged as a net food exporter to the world. Provide reasons.

2022
1. Describe the characteristics and types of primary rocks.

2. Discuss the meaning of colour-coded weather warnings for cyclone prone areas given by India Meteorological Department.

3. Discuss the natural resource potentials of ‘Deccan Trap’.

4. Examine the potential of wind energy in India and explain the reasons for their limited spatial spread.

5. What are the forces that influence ocean currents? Describe their role in fishing industry of the world.

6. Describing the distribution of rubber producing countries, indicate the major environmental issues faced by them.

7. Mention the significance of straits and isthmus in international trade.

8. Troposphere is a very significant atmosphere layer that determines weather processes. How?

2021
1. Differentiate the causes of landslides in the Himalayan region and Western Ghats.

2. Despite India being one of the countries of Gondwanaland, its mining industry contributes much less to its Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in percentage. Discuss.

3. What are the environmental implications of the reclamation of the water bodies into urban land use? Explain with examples.

4. Mention the global occurrence of volcanic eruptions in 2021 and their impact on regional environment.

5. Why is India considered as a subcontinent? Elaborate your answer.

6. Briefly mention the alignment of major mountain ranges of the world and explain their impact on local weather conditions, with examples.

7. How do the melting of the Arctic ice and glaciers of the Antarctic differently affect the weather patterns and human activities on the Earth? Explain.

8. Discuss the multi-dimensional implications of uneven distribution of mineral oil in the world.

9. What are the main socio-economic implications arising out of the development of IT industries in major cities of India?

2020
1. Discuss the geophysical characteristics of Circum-Pacific Zone.

2. The process of desertification does not have climate boundaries. Justify with examples.

3. How will the melting of Himalayan glaciers have a far-reaching impact on the water resources of India?

4. Account for the present location of iron and steel industries away from the source of raw material, by giving examples.

5. The interlinking of rivers can provide viable solutions to the multi-dimensional inter-related problems of droughts, floods, and interrupted navigation. Critically examine.

6. Account for the huge flooding of million cities in India including the smart ones like Hyderabad and Pune. Suggest lasting remedial measures.

7. India has immense potential of solar energy though there are regional variations in its developments. Elaborate.

8. Examine the status of forest resources of India and its resultant impact on climate change.

2018

1. Why is Indian Regional Navigational Satellite System (IRNSS) needed? How does it help in navigation?

2. Why is India taking keen interest in resources of Arctic region?

3. Define mantle plume and explain its role in plate tectonics.

4. What are the consequences of spreading of ‘Dead Zones’ on marine ecosystems?

5. “The ideal solution of depleting ground water resources in India is water harvesting system”. How can it be made effective in urban areas?

6. Defining blue revolution, explain the problems and strategies for pisciculture development in India.

7. What is the significance of Industrial Corridors in India? Identifying industrial corridors, explain their main characteristics.

8. Mention core strategies for the transformation of aspirational districts in India & explain the nature of convergence, collaboration & Competition for its success.

2017

1. How does the Juno Mission of NASA help to understand the origin and evolution of the Earth?

2. “In spite of adverse environmental impact, coal mining is still inevitable for development”. Discuss.

3. Mention the advantages of the cultivation of pulses because of which the year 2016 was declared as the International Year of Pulses by United Nations.

4. How does the cryosphere affect global climate?

5. “The growth of cities as I.T. hubs has opened up new avenues of employment, but has also created new problems”. Substantiate this statement with examples.

6. Account for variations in oceanic salinity and discuss its multidimensional effects.

7. Petroleum refineries are not necessarily located nearer to crude oil producing areas, particularly in many of the developing countries. Explain its implications.

8. In what way can floods be converted into a sustainable source of irrigation and all-weather inland navigation in India?

9. What characteristics can be assigned to monsoon climate that succeeds in feeding more than 50 percent of the world population residing in Monsoon Asia?

2016

1. With a brief background of quality of urban life in India, introduce the objectives and strategy of the ‘Smart City Programme.’

2. Discuss the concept of air mass and explain its role in macro-climatic changes.

3. “The Himalayas are highly prone to landslides.” Discuss the causes and suggest suitable measures of mitigation.

4. The effective management of land and water resources will drastically reduce the human miseries. Explain.

5. South China Sea has assumed great geopolitical significance in the present context. Comment.

6. Major cities of India are becoming vulnerable to flood conditions. Discuss.

7. Present an account of the Indus Water Treaty and examine its ecological, economic and political implications in the context of changing bilateral relations.

8. Enumerate the problems and prospects of inland water transport in India.

9. In what way micro-watershed development projects help in water conservation in drought-prone and semi-arid regions of India?

2015

1. Explain the factors responsible for the origin of ocean currents? How do they influence regional climates, fishing and navigation?

2. Mumbai, Delhi and Kolkata are the three mega cities of the country but the air pollution is much more serious problem in Delhi as compared to the other two. Why is this so?

3. India is well endowed with fresh water resources. Critically examine why it still suffers from water scarcity.

4. The states of Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand are reaching the limits of their ecological carrying capacity due to tourism. Critically evaluate.

5. How far do you agree that the behaviour of the Indian monsoon has been changing due to humanizing landscapes? Discuss.

6. Smart cities in India cannot sustain without smart villages. Discuss this statement in the backdrop of rural urban integration.

7. What are the economic significances of discovery of oil in Arctic Sea and its possible environmental consequences?

2014

1. Most of the unusual climatic happenings are explained as an outcome of the El-Nino effect. Do you agree?

2. Why are the world’s fold mountain systems located along the margins of continents? Bring out the association between the global distribution of fold mountains and the earthquakes and volcanoes.

3. Explain the formation of thousands of islands in Indonesian and Philippines archipelagos.

4. Tropical cyclones are largely confined to South China Sea, Bay of Bengal and Gulf of Mexico. Why?

5. Bring out the relationship between the shrinking Himalayan glaciers and the symptoms of climate change in the Indian sub-continent.

6. Whereas the British planters had developed tea gardens all along the Shivaliks and Lesser Himalayas from Assam to Himachal Pradesh, in effect they did not succeed beyond the Darjeeling area. Explain.

7. Why did the Green Revolution in India virtually by-pass the eastern region despite fertile soil and good availability of water?

8. Account for the change in the spatial pattern of the Iron and Steel industry in the world.

9. Critically evaluate the various resources of the oceans which can be harnessed to meet the resource crisis in the world.

10. How does India see its place in the economic space of rising natural resource rich Africa?

2013

1. (a) What do you understand by the theory of ‘continental drift’? Discuss t he prominent evidences in its support. (b) The recent cyclone on east coast of India was called ‘Phailin’. How are the tropical cyclones named across the world? Elaborate.

2. (a) Bring out the causes for the formation of heat islands in the urban habitat of the world. (b) What do you understand by the phenomenon of ‘temperature inversion’ in meteorology? How does it affect weather and the habitants of the place?

3. Major hot deserts in northern hemisphere are located between 20-30 deg N latitudes and on the western side of the continents. Why?

4. (a) Bring out the causes for more frequent occurrence of landslides in the Himalayas than in the Western Ghats. (b) There is no formation of deltas by rivers of the Western Ghats. Why?

5. (a) Do you agree that there is a growing trend of opening new sugar mills in southern States of India? Discuss with justification. (b) Analyze the factors for the highly decentralized cotton textile industry in India.

6. With growing scarcity of fossil fuels, the atomic energy is gaining more and more significance in India. Discuss the availability of raw material required for the generation of atomic energy in India and in the world.

7. It is said that India has substantial reserves of shale oil and gas, which can feed the needs of the country for quarter century. However, tapping of the resource does not appear to be high on the agenda. Discuss critically the availability and issues involved.


Indian SOciety:-

2023
Do you think marriage as a sacrament is loosing its value in Modern India?
Explain why suicide among young women is increasing in Indian society.
Child cuddling is now being replaced by mobile phones. Discuss its impact on the socialization of children.
Why did human development fail to keep pace with economic development in India?
Does urbanization lead to more segregation and/or marginalization of the poor in Indian metropolises?
Why is caste identity in India both fluid and static?
Discuss the impact of post-liberal economy on ethnic identity and communalism.
2022
Explore and evaluate the impact of 'Work From Home' on family relationships.
How is the growth of Tier 2 cities related to the rise of a new middle class with an emphasis on the culture of consumption?
Given the diversities among tribal communities in India, in which specific contexts should they be considered as a single category?
Analyse the salience of 'sect' in Indian society vis-a-vis caste, region and religion.
Are tolerance, assimilation and pluralism the key elements in the making of an Indian form of secularism? Justify your answer.
2021
Examine the uniqueness of tribal knowledge system when compared with mainstream knowledge and cultural systems.
Examine the role of 'Gig Economy’ in the process of empowerment of women in India.
What are the main socio-economic implications arising out of the development of IT industries in major cities of India?
Discuss the main objectives of Population Education and point out the measures to achieve them in India in detail.
What is Cryptocurrency? How does it affect global society? Has it been affecting Indian society also?
How does Indian society maintain continuity in traditional social values? Enumerate the changes taking place in it.
2020
Has caste lost its relevance in understanding the multi-cultural Indian Society? Elaborate your answer with illustrations.
COVID-19 pandemic accelerated class inequalities and poverty in India. Comment.
Do you agree that regionalism in India appears to be a consequence of rising cultural assertiveness? Argue.
Is diversity and pluralism in India under threat due to globalisation? Justify your answer.
Customs and traditions suppress reason leading to obscurantism. Do you agree?
How have digital initiatives in India contributed to the functioning of the education system in the country? Elaborate your answer.
2019
What makes the Indian society unique in sustaining its culture? Discuss.
“Empowering women is the key to control population growth.” Discuss.
What are the challenges to our cultural practices in the name of secularism?
Do we have cultural pockets of small India all over the nation? Elaborate with examples.
What are the continued challenges for women in India against time and space?
Are we losing our local identity for the global identity? Discuss.
2018
“Caste system is assuming new identities and associational forms. Hence, the caste system cannot be eradicated in India.” Comment.
‘Despite the implementation of various programmes for the eradication of poverty by the government in India, poverty is still existing’. Explain by giving reasons.
How the Indian concept of secularism different from the western model of secularism? Discuss.
‘Women’s movement in India has not addresses the issues of women of lower social strata.’ Substantiate your view.
‘Globalisation is generally said to promote cultural homogenisation but due to this cultural specificities appear to be strengthened in the Indian society.’ Elucidate.
‘Communalism arises either due to power struggle or relative deprivation.’ Argue by giving suitable illustrations.
2017
In the context of the diversity of India, can it be said that the regions form cultural units rather than the States? Give reasons with examples for your view point.
What are the two major legal initiatives by the State since Independence addressing discrimination against Scheduled Tribes (STs)?
The spirit of tolerance and love is not only an interesting feature of Indian society from very early times, but it is also playing an important part at the present. Elaborate.
Distinguish between religiousness/religiosity and communalism giving one example of how the former has got transformed into the latter in independent India.
“The growth of cities as I.T. hubs has opened up new avenues of employment, but has also created new problems”. Substantiate this statement with examples.
2016
Has the formation of linguistic states strengthened the cause of Indian unity?
To what extent globalisation has influenced the core of cultural diversity in India? Explain.
“An essential condition to eradicate poverty is to liberate the poor from the process of deprivation.” Substantiate this statement with suitable examples.
Why are the tribals in India referred to as ‘the Scheduled Tribes’? Indicate the major provisions enshrined in the Constitution of India for their upliftment.
With a brief background of quality of urban life in India, introduce the objectives and strategy of the ‘Smart City Programme.”
What is the basis of regionalism? Is it that unequal distribution of benefits of development on regional basis eventually promotes regionalism? Substantiate your answer.
2015
Describe any four cultural elements of diversity in India and rate their relative significance in building a national identity.
Critically examine whether growing population is the cause of poverty OR poverty is the main cause of population increase in India.
How do you explain the statistics that show that the sex ratio in Tribes in India is more favourable to women than the sex ratio among Scheduled Castes?
Discuss the changes in the trends of labour migration within and outside India in the last four decades.
Discuss the positive and negative effects of globalization on women in India.
Debate the issue of whether and how contemporary movements for assertion of Dalit identity work towards annihilation of caste.
Smart cities in India cannot sustain without smart villages. Discuss this statement in the backdrop of rural urban integration.
2014
How does patriarchy impact the position of a middle class working woman in India?
Why do some of the most prosperous regions of India have an adverse sex ratio for women? Give your arguments.
The life cycle of a joint family depends on economic factors rather than social values. Discuss.
Discuss the various economic and socio-cultural forces that are driving increasing feminization of agriculture in India.
How do the Indian debates on secularism differ from the debates in the West?
2013
Discussion the various social problems which originated out of the speedy process of urbanization in India.
Male membership needs to be encouraged in order to make women’s organization free from gender bias. Comment.
Critically examine the effects of globalization on the aged population in India.
Growing feeling of regionalism is an important factor in the generation of demand for a separate state. Discuss.
